---
layout: post
title: "Advice for Early PhD Students"
date: 2024-02-20
description: Advice I shared after defending my PhD.
---

##### Preamble

Andrew McCallum's lab at UMass (IESL) has a tradition: after receiving a handful of niceties from their labmates and colleagues, graduating PhD students return the favor by reciting a few pieces of advice. This serves a dual purpose, giving the PhD a chance to reflect on the path that got them to the defense and, hopefully, sharing wisdom that will increase the next generation's chance of success even by a small margin. Here's what I said[^1], heavily paraphrased and organized by topic:

[^1]: I was co-advised with Andrew McCallum and Mohit Iyyer, so I shared my advice in a combined gathering with both labs. A fun fact is that I am the first PhD grad to be co-advised by either Andrew or Mohit!

##### On Strategy (Part 1)

__Embrace Brevity__ It is frequently said that "The PhD is a marathon, not a sprint." Well, try running a marathon at Kelvin Kiptum's pace[^2] and you may think differently... There is no time to rest! I have a different take: "The PhD is a series of short-distance runs, so make sure to get rest and recovery in between!" I believe this framing is not only more accurate but more useful for life after PhD. Finishing the PhD is not the end; it is only the beginning of the next adventure.

[^2]: Kelvin Kiptum is the world-record holder for the men's marathon race (2h0m35s), and it was widely speculated that he would become the first person to break the 2h marker. His 1-mile pace is about 4m30s! Tragically, Kelvin recently passed away in a car accident, yet they continue to be an inspiration ([RIP](https://apnews.com/article/Kelvin-kiptum-marathon-kenya-killed-314b41c92c9166a3a698a2860fa3fc15)).

__Pursue Positivity__ When reading research papers, be scrutinous but also extremely optimistic. It's often harder and requires more creativity to find good takeaways than criticisms. More generally, you will probably benefit more when you approach each opportunity with the goal of "How can I find something good here?"

##### Cliches

The next few points are often mentioned by previous PhDs in some form. They're still worth mentioning, although by now I hope they seem obvious!

__Maintain a Foundation__ (said with a harsher tone) Make it your responsibility to build a strong foundation and keep up with the field. There are many tips & tricks to do this: read lots of papers, read abstracts every day, follow researchers on social media. This is a field of change, growth, complexity, and entropy.

__Refine Soft Skills__ Develop your soft skills. Be a good communicator. Be generous with your judgment, since you won't know when someone has a good and private reason for being slow on email. For decision-making, internalize how your choices influence your long-term goals, and try to avoid "going with the flow".

__Actively Engage__ Participate in the community. Go to conferences and workshops. Email random researchers to praise their work or ask questions. Help and support other people, no matter at what stage of your career.

##### On Strategy (Part 2)

__Solicit Feedback__ The PhD is structured in a way so that at all stages you have many chances to get detailed feedback on your progress and ideas from experts. This is one the most special parts of the program, and it's definitely something to take advantage of. To get more valuable feedback, you will eventually need to present your work in a more opinionated way. With that in mind, it's still important to refrain from being overly stubborn. Being a good listener and staying open to feedback will pay dividends.

__Prioritize Problems__ As much as possible, get more excited about "problems" rather than "methods".

##### Support Network

__Resist Isolation__ Do not put your life on pause just because you are a PhD. As the saying goes, "The typical PhD takes 5-7 years to complete, but if you really focus, ignore your friends and family, work late into the night, and dedicate your whole self to your work then it only takes 10+ years!" [I can't remember where I first heard this. Please send me the source if this sounds familiar!]

__Leverage Your Environment__ (Inspired by similar comments from [Rajarshi Das](https://rajarshd.github.io/)) UMass is truly world-class. Plus Andrew and Mohit are exceptional advisors! The university has an abundance of resources and a diversity of departments and specializations, especially within computer science. There are a vast amount of special opportunies that are hard to find almost everywhere else, such as collaborating with the brilliant Center for Intelligent Information Retrieval. I would encourage you to lean on your network. As an example, I'm always a slack, or email, or twitter message away.

##### Acknowledgements

Thank you to members at [IESL](https://www.iesl.cs.umass.edu/) and [UMass NLP](https://nlp.cs.umass.edu/) for providing valuable feedback and discussing different pieces of advice, and [Wenlong](https://wenlongzhao094.github.io/) for their comments on the writing and format.

##### Dedication

This writeup is dedicated to Baba Roza. She was a teacher and knew what was important in life. Everything you did was "unbelievable".

##### Footnotes
